>> Speaker 1: All right, so
here we go, with our new element flexible
code, we're gonna be able to compose code.
>> Speaker 2: I've added
one new element here.
>> Speaker 1: Do I need to mark that off?
>> Speaker 2: No, I do not.
>> Speaker 1: So we're gonna use map,
we're then gonna replace the elements.
>> Speaker 2: Here we go, people,
this is almost our last diagram.
>> Speaker 1: I shouldn't start saying
that, two and a half hours before the end,
when there's two and a half hours more
diagrams, but it's getting there.
>> Speaker 2: We are now
gonna be element flexible.
>> Speaker 1: It's gonna allow us to have
multiple elements in different order.
>> Speaker 2: I can switch around elements
here, I could have ten great jobs.
>> Speaker 1: I could have great job,
Phil, followed by Div, great job Y,
followed by Div, great job, Alexa,
followed by Div, great job,
Matric followed by Div, great job,
Justice followed by Div, great job,
John, followed by Div, great job, Ian,
followed by Div, great job, Paul.
>> Speaker 2: There we go, well done.
>> Speaker 1: I can just list them out.
>> Speaker 2: And then they will all be
converted into DOM elements via my map
that's going to run convert
on every one of them.
>> Speaker 1: Here we go,
so let's get diagramming.
>> Speaker 2: This is gonna be
a flexible virtual visual JavaScript DOM
that manifests in our C++ elements and
I'm gonna start with Phil.
>> Speaker 1: Well, gotta first
do some diagramming, haven't I?
>> Speaker 2: So
let me get everything set up here,
we have our web page, there we go.
>> Speaker 1: There's our
JavaScript runtime and our C++.
>> Speaker 2: Thank you, beautiful, and
we know that immediately in our C++,
we have a body element,
that's the whole page there.
>> Speaker 1: Our layout and
render engine ensures that
everything transfers to the page.
>> Speaker 2: And
now we have our JavaScript runtime,
everyone wanna see my schema again?
>> Speaker 1: No, no [LAUGH].
>> Speaker 2: [LAUGH]
>> Speaker 1: All right,
we're going to anyway, dot HTML.
>> Speaker 2: There it is, and
it loads into our web browser.
>> Speaker 1: The HTML parser is
going to interpret each line and
add it to the C++ list of elements
whose output will be actual pixels.
>> Speaker 2: And then we have our
JavaScript runtime which is where
we really do most of our work
with our memory, there we go.
>> Speaker 1: So we also know we
have timer out of here, there it is.
>> Speaker 2: Okay, so,
I've now closed my HTML file.
>> Speaker 1: It technically still has a
script tag that's loading up at JavaScript
runtime but I've got my little
triangle there pointing right now,
because that file is now closed.
>> Speaker 2: Okay, so Phil, jump me in.
>> Speaker 1: What's the first thing
that gets auto added to my JavaScript
memory when it's executed, sorry,
when the runtime is hosted by
the web browser and not by node?
>> Speaker 2: We get the document DOM.
>> Speaker 1: Beautiful, perfect, and
that is going to be linked through
a hidden property to what?
>> Speaker 2: Our DOM.
>> Speaker 1: To our DOM, beautiful,
a hidden link to it, there it is.
>> Speaker 2: And I tell you, I'm keeping
that enthusiasm up for the same thing,
so there it is.
>> Speaker 1: And we have,
what methods we're gonna find useful and
what property we're
gonna find useful here?
>> Speaker 2: The createElements method,
and the body getter.
>> Speaker 1: Getter setter property,
beautiful.
>> Speaker 2: Shoot, I didn't mean to,
yeah, that's perfect.
>> Speaker 1: Good, okay,
now let's get storing our data.
>> Speaker 2: We are then gonna have our
JavaScript manifestation of that data
instantiated, put into our description
that's still data generic between
line four and six or whatever it is.
>> Speaker 1: And then we have our elems.
>> Speaker 2: This is because
now when we are mapping,
we are not gonna be generating jsInput
from our first, element jsDiv from
our sort of index one element,
jsInput from our index zero element.
>> Speaker 1: We are gonna be generic and
have all of our accessor
objects added to an array
as a result of mapping over
the vDOM that is going
to be assigned to elems.
>> Speaker 2: So elems is now instead
of jsInfo, jsDiv, it's a generic list.
>> Speaker 1: It will be as big
as the number of elements, or
number of elements we've described in
our vDOM, and here it's gonna be three.
>> Speaker 2: So yeah, let's start putting
some stuff in memory, Phil, please.
>> Speaker 1: We're gonna
declare a name variable and
initialize it to an empty string.
>> Speaker 2: Great.
>> Speaker 1: We're gonna declare a vDOM
variable and leave it uninitialized.
>> Speaker 2: Great.
>> Speaker 1: And same thing,
declare an elems variable.
>> Speaker 2: Perfect, perfect, beautiful,
and then some function definitions.
>> Speaker 1: One's just a simple handler.
>> Speaker 2: Yeah,
we declare a create DOM function.
>> Speaker 1: I'll just do
the handler there, handle.
>> Speaker 2: What's the next one,
update DOM?
>> Speaker 1: Sorry, I forgot createDOM,
sorry, sorry, createVDOM.
>> Speaker 2: Sorry, I got ahead
of myself, thank you, sorry Phil,
what's the first one there?
>> Speaker 1: Create,
I can't see where we're at on the board.
>> Speaker 2: Is it VDOM or-
>> Speaker 1: VDOM, yeah,
that was completely my fault.
>> Speaker 2: createVDOM, and then it's
the next one, it's the handler, handle.
>> Speaker 1: And
then what's the next one?
>> Speaker 2: Declare the update DOM.
>> Speaker 1: Update DOM,
brilliant, update DOM.
>> Speaker 2: Declare
the convert function.
>> Speaker 1: Yeah, so
let's just go through these each.
>> Speaker 2: createVDOM,
we've seen before.
>> Speaker 1: It's going to, I guess,
to use a word I don't really understand,
instantiate our arrays,
I shouldn't say that,
to use a word I definitely understand.
>> Speaker 2: We're gonna call createVDOM.
>> Speaker 1: When we do our, I guess,
non-specific, data still generic,
dynamic description of what's
gonna end up, hopefully,
on the DOM, still has its placeholders.
>> Speaker 2: That when we run createVDOM,
we'll get filled in with whatever
the latest data is, great.
>> Speaker 1: There's our handle function,
which is gonna introduce something here.
>> Speaker 2: Thank goodness, because
otherwise I'm sure you're all thinking,
why are we doing this one again?
>> Speaker 1: I got it,
I know how Matt works.
>> Speaker 2: Well, we're also
gonna introduce the event object,
because once we are no
longer giving individual
labels in JavaScript to our
input element on the DOM.
>> Speaker 1: While we could technically
figure out by DOM traversal which element
it is that the user's inputted on,
and therefore get the value of it.
>> Speaker 2: It might be easier to
use the event object that gives us
all the information
about the user's action.
>> Speaker 1: That's the handle function.
>> Speaker 2: Then we've got our updateDOM
function that runs the virtual JavaScript
visual DOM creation.
>> Speaker 1: Then it's gonna hit
each element with the converter.
>> Speaker 2: And then it's gonna add
the converted elements to the page.
>> Speaker 1: Then we have our convert
function that needs to do all our job of
converting.
>> Speaker 2: I probably should really
put that one above update DOM, right,
just sort of a logical flow, doesn't
really matter, but just for logical flow.
>> Speaker 1: Remember, by the way,
people, you will notice that we sometimes,
I don't think we're doing it here, but
we will end up calling functions
before they're defined.
>> Speaker 2: Because we use the function
keyword, we get this hoisting notion that
ensures that all function definitions
in our code are available
immediately wherever we end up calling
them, even above where they're defined.
>> Speaker 1: It's a design
tradition from JavaScript,
it's up to somebody whether they use it.
>> Speaker 2: But in this case,
we're not using it, but
we might end up using it later on.
>> Speaker 1: And then our set interval is
gonna be called, which is gonna run our
main data to view converter, update
DOM on repeat every 50 milliseconds.
>> Speaker 2: Sorry, I want to
flesh that out, back to you, Phil.
>> Speaker 1: I sound like I've finished
up a great report on local news.
>> Speaker 2: [LAUGH]
>> Speaker 1: [LAUGH]
>> Speaker 2: Do you want me to pick up on
the setInterval?
>> Speaker 1: Just declare convert.
>> Speaker 2: I've done that and
then, yeah, setInterval, brilliant.
>> Speaker 1: So we are going to
execute the setInterval function.
>> Speaker 2: Beautiful.
>> Speaker 1: And
passing to it as its first argument,
the updateDOM function definition.
>> Speaker 2: Perfect.
>> Speaker 1: And the number 15 to
denote 15 milliseconds in between.
>> Speaker 2: Beautiful, we find out
the rules of that, by the way, on MDN,
or ChatGPT, or GitHub Copilot.
>> Speaker 1: And then that is going to
pass updateDOM to our timer to set what,
Phil?
>> Speaker 2: 15 milliseconds.
>> Speaker 1: Yeah, and the associated
function that will be called
back at that moment, the callback
function is, remind me again, what?
>> Speaker 2: UpdateDOM.
>> Speaker 1: UpdateDOM, brilliant,
I'm not missing anything, right?
>> Speaker 2: That line is now, I have,
I've got my call stack here ready to go.
>> Speaker 1: Call stack, there it is.
>> Speaker 2: And callback queue, perfect.
>> Speaker 1: Great,
this line is now done, finished.
>> Speaker 2: And now, Phil,
what happens 15 milliseconds later?
>> Speaker 1: 15 milliseconds later,
the updateDOM callback function-
>> Speaker 2: Yeah.
>> Speaker 1: Is going to be
introduced to our callback queue.
>> Speaker 2: Yes.
>> Speaker 1: Which at that point,
the event loop will allow
it to be pushed to the top
of the call stack.
>> Speaker 2: Beautiful, I'm just gonna
put it straight there because, yes,
exactly as you say.
>> Speaker 1: So updateDOM,
do we add parens on it here?
>> Speaker 2: No.
>> Speaker 1: No, JavaScript is going to
put the parens on for us, there they are.
>> Speaker 2: No, that's not it.
>> Speaker 1: [LAUGH]
>> Speaker 2: I think we're all getting
tired, but we're all doing very,
very well.
>> Speaker 1: No, no, no, well, yep,
there we go,
>> Speaker 2: There it is, added,
beautiful.
>> Speaker 1: And we are going to start,
our thread of execution is going to float
in at about 15 milliseconds and start
executing updateDOM with a brand new,
everybody, is it time to wake up,
a brand new what?
>> Speaker 2: Execution context.
>> Speaker 1: Beautiful,
thank you, everybody.
>> Speaker 2: And there it is, and
its execution context is created
at the behest of JavaScript.
>> Speaker 1: And let me just see,
it's gonna do a bunch of stuff, so
I'm gonna try make it as big as possible.
>> Speaker 2: Really no need
to shrink it at all, here.
>> Speaker 1: Let's have it as big as
possible because it is our main function.
>> Speaker 2: But before all of that,
we need to work with our more flexible,
visualDOM and virtualDOM here,
and we're gonna run updateDOM.
>> Speaker 1: Alexa, into it we go,
and we are going to, well, tell me,
what's gonna happen?
>> Speaker 2: So first,
we're gonna reassign vDOM-
>> Speaker 1: Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: To the result
of invoking create vDOM.
>> Speaker 1: Brilliant, create vDOM,
which we know is going to
have as its output, yeah?
>> Speaker 2: An array.
>> Speaker 1: Array of 3, I think, is it?
>> Speaker 2: Yes.
>> Speaker 1: Sub-arrays,
I'm just gonna draw them there like that,
people, just so we can sort of see,
but that's going to be stored into,
as you said, what global constant?
>> Speaker 2: VDOM.
>> Speaker 1: VDOM, okay,
here it is, and like before,
it's gonna have, yeah,
now three sub-arrays.
>> Speaker 2: And each of them describes,
hopefully, a different element to be added
to the C++ list of elements
that will show up on the page.
>> Speaker 1: Brilliant, and now,
what are those three with our data
passed into them, or evaluated in them?
>> Speaker 2: Yes,
the first one is first the string input.
>> Speaker 1: Yep.
>> Speaker 2: And then an empty string.
>> Speaker 2: And
then the handle function definition.
>> Speaker 1: Handle function definition,
the next one?
>> Speaker 2: The next one is
the string div, the string hello, !.
>> Speaker 1: Beautiful, I didn't do it so
well there, but yeah, and the next one?
>> Speaker 2: The string div and
the string, great job.
>> Speaker 1: Beautiful, note, by the way,
not sure that one depends on our data, but
that's okay, we're describing in full
what the user will see in one place,
that's kind of amazing.
>> Speaker 2: Great, now, we hit line 13,
and we've got our visual, our virtual,
our JavaScript DOM, but
I want to have them on the actual DOM, but
I don't wanna think about it too much.
>> Speaker 1: And I wanna have it flexible
to however many of these elements I have.
>> Speaker 2: And I wanna have it
flexible to changing up their order.
>> Speaker 1: Well,
that's what we have in line 13.
>> Speaker 2: So
LMs is going to be the return value,
the output of calling on
this list of elements vDOM,
the built-in map function and passing it,
the convert function definition.
>> Speaker 1: What's it do?
>> Speaker 2: It's going to hit the vDOM,
each element one by one with convert.
>> Speaker 1: So the first time, it's
going to hit vDOM position what, Alexa?
>> Speaker 2: 0.
>> Speaker 1: VDOM position 0, brilliant.
>> Speaker 2: VDOM position 0,
brand new execution context for it,
and into it we go.
>> Speaker 1: Let's at least do
the first one, if we don't do any more.
>> Speaker 2: Note that the output of
this will be added to, as map does,
map inside of it creates,
what's map inside of it create, Alexa?
>> Speaker 1: An array.
>> Speaker 2: An array, exactly, ready for
each element to be added, really,
the return value of each call to the
function convert that was passed in and
is gonna be called as many times as
there are elements in the array.
>> Speaker 1: If you've been to
higher-order functions hard parts,
what was it called, convert copy array?
>> Speaker 2: And so yeah, anyway,
whatever we called map
before the big reveal.
>> Speaker 1: So into convert we go and
our node parameter, Alexa, is?
>> Speaker 2: Yes, in our local memory
that's going to have the value of
the 0th element of our vDOM.
>> Speaker 1: There it is, there.
>> Speaker 2: Which is an array
with input empty string and
the handle function definition.
>> Speaker 1: So it's an array of input,
empty string, and
the handle function definition,
beautiful, there it is.
>> Speaker 2: And now, what do we
do inside of this and assign to LM?
>> Speaker 1: We are going to call
the createElement method on the document
object, to use that hidden
link to access the DOM and
create a new element of the type
that is at the 0th index of our node
local variable, which is the string input,
>> Speaker 2: Beautiful,
and that's gonna create, as you say,
an input element on our C++,
>> Speaker 1: List of elements,
the DOM, there it is.
>> Speaker 2: Brilliant, excellent, and we
can't pull that back into JavaScript, so
instead JavaScript gives us an output to
assign to LM as a local temporary label.
>> Speaker 1: It gives us what?
>> Speaker 2: A JavaScript object-
>> Speaker 1: Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: With that
new input node on the DOM.
>> Speaker 1: Yep.
>> Speaker 2: And all of our
getter-setter methods-
>> Speaker 1: You're doing
brilliantly, yeah.
>> Speaker 2: Go with an input.
>> Speaker 1: Yeah,
perfect, yeah, perfect.
>> Speaker 2: Link to exactly the input
and all of our getter-setter properties,
including, I guess, well, the ones
we know we're gonna have access to.
>> Speaker 1: And they're added by
JavaScript, based on, as you say,
what the element is we're linking to
in the DOM, in this case, an input And
we're then going to use some of those text
content we're not gonna actively use,
I mean we are, we've hopefully
written some conditional logic saying,
if node position zero is of type input,
please only use the value and
the on input setters.
>> Speaker 2: However, that's too
much code for me to write on this and
I was trying to save space so that we
can fit it on and diagram more easily.
>> Speaker 1: So we know that it will not
cause any harm assigning to text content,
the user's view will not change.
>> Speaker 2: So
we'll just skip over line 19 and
hit line 20 where we're going
to use what setter here, Alexa.
>> Speaker 1: The value.
>> Speaker 2: Exactly to set-
>> Speaker 1: To set the value on
the input node on the DOM
to be what is at our node
array at index one,
which is an empty string.
>> Speaker 2: Perfect,
we're drawing it from our pretty
picture here describing the page.
>> Speaker 1: It's an empty string and
that empty string gets added to the DOM
element, and
then what's the line we do next?
>> Speaker 2: Then we are going to use our
oninputSetter-
>> Speaker 1: Yep.
>> Speaker 2: To set an input handler
on the DOM on that input node to be
the function definition that we have next-
>> Speaker 1: That was node 1.
>> Speaker 2: This is node position 2,
exactly, which is?
>> Speaker 1: And that's handle.
>> Speaker 2: Handle, exactly.
>> Speaker 1: And
we're going through convert here, but
we know that in practice if we built
this in our code for ourselves,
we're going through this function.
>> Speaker 2: We're just
describing what we want here.
>> Speaker 1: It's all gonna show up,
isn't that beautiful?
>> Speaker 2: Of course
we're all suffering here.
>> Speaker 1: [LAUGH]
>> Speaker 2: Because I don't know,
it's nice knowing what's going on I guess.
>> Speaker 1: And then finally,
we've done all of our work,
we still have our accessor object.
>> Speaker 2: It's gonna be
pushed into this array here along
with two more from our
further runnings of convert.
>> Speaker 1: So the next running
of convert with V DOM position 1,
don't worry, we're not gonna do it,
I don't think.
>> Speaker 2: V DOM position 1 is gonna
be pushed in as a second accessor object,
what's gonnna be on our DOM, it's div.
>> Speaker 1: And
we can look here, and hello text.
>> Speaker 2: Content is gonna be hello.
>> Speaker 1: There it is.
>> Speaker 2: Exclamation mark.
>> Speaker 1: And then because it's, and
that object is then pushed in here with
its link, and now our third is pushed in.
>> Speaker 2: By the way,
I drew the objects here before
they're actually returned out.
>> Speaker 1: The third is from another
run of convert, this time V DOM 2,
and that goes in as the third
element of the array.
>> Speaker 2: And that is going to
have created also an associated
corresponding div element with
its own text which is the string.
>> Speaker 1: Great job.
>> Speaker 2: Exactly, and now this
list of three accessor objects will
be returned out of the map call
into which global constant, Alexa?
>> Speaker 1: Elems.
>> Speaker 2: Elems, brilliant.
>> Speaker 1: There it is.
>> Speaker 2: And there it is.
>> Speaker 1: I'm gonna draw it as a big
array with inside of it three objects,
each with an associated DOM element,
and each with a link, each with a,
I'm just gonna draw them at the side here.
>> Speaker 2: It's a bit funny,
I know, but each with a link,
link, link to their respective,
>> Speaker 1: Corresponding DOM elements.
>> Speaker 2: And
each with their pertinent setter and
getter properties available.
>> Speaker 1: My goodness [LAUGH].
>> Speaker 2: And so,
at this point I'm sure you're all.
>> Speaker 1: Well, when I say that,
by the way, I'm just commiserating,
[LAUGH] but also I know you're not.
>> Speaker 2: I know you're absolutely
rearing to go which is fantastic,
because we have now only
one last thing to do.
>> Speaker 1: Alexa,
if you can finish it off for me here.
>> Speaker 2: We have only
one last thing to do.
>> Speaker 1: We finished our map,
we have a visual DOM with all
of our data carried through.
>> Speaker 2: It's flowed into our elems,
which it has access for
the corresponding online DOM elements.
>> Speaker 1: And now,
these DOM elements ain't showing up yet.
>> Speaker 2: So what do we do
in our last line of update DOM?
>> Speaker 1: We are going to use
replaceChildren which is on the body,
which is on our document object-
>> Speaker 2: Yeah.
>> Speaker 1: That links to the DOM.
>> Speaker 2: But
look what we've got to do here.
>> Speaker 1: A little bit different.
>> Speaker 2: Yes, so we are going
to spread all of our elements in
LMs-
>> Speaker 1: Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: Into our list of arguments.
>> Speaker 1: So
that's going to take LM's position 0,
LM's position 1, and LM's position 2, and
insert them one by one by
one to be the replacement of
body's current, which is none, children.
>> Speaker 2: Which means we can
just move our array, our list,
to include our children elements now.
>> Speaker 1: And
what will show up on our page but,
input with nothing, and
what a lot of work for nothing.
>> Speaker 2: And with hello and
a div with great job.
>> Speaker 1: Hey, displayed from content.
>> Speaker 2: Yes, well done to Alexa,
awesome work from Alexa.
>> Speaker 1: [APPLAUSE]
>> Speaker 2: Exactly right.
>> Speaker 1: Fantastic work from Alexa.
>> Speaker 2: Our update DOM
execution context closes off, good.
>> Speaker 1: Our update DOM function
has converted our underlying data into
a full representation in JavaScript
instantiated with its actual data,
in this case,
quite boring an empty string for now,
that then produces through mapping over
that and running convert to convert
each of these descriptions into actual DOM
elements and associated accessor objects.
>> Speaker 2: We end up with,
once they're appended to the body or
replaced existing children through
the spread of those elements,
we end up with our full user
interface directly mirroring, or
mirroring is a weird word for
it to suggest reflection, I guess,
directly mapped from the JavaScript
description in lines 4 through 6.
>> Speaker 1: And the data
instantiated representation of that,
data implemented representation
of that in the DOM, yay.